NGF: Add external authentication user guide (#1859)
nginx/documentation: content/ngf/traffic-security/external-authentication.md

## Overview

The `ExternalAuth` filter is declared in the `filters` list of an HTTPRoute rule. When NGINX processes a request that matches the rule, it first sends a subrequest to the backend referenced by the filter. Based on the status returned by that backend, NGINX either forwards the original request to the route's `backendRefs` or returns the error status to the client.

Each route rule supports only one `ExternalAuth` filter. If your authentication flow requires multiple checks, consolidate them into a single authentication service that performs all the necessary validations.

The filter translates to NGINX's [ngx_http_auth_request_module](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html) directives:

- [`auth_request`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request) — sends a subrequest to the specified URI and grants or denies access based on the response status.
- [`auth_request_set`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request_set) — captures a value from the authentication response and stores it in a variable for use in the main request.

## Before you begin

> - [Install]({{< ref "/ngf/install/" >}}) NGINX Gateway Fabric.

Reviewer: Can we also mention here to install the gateway api crds in experimental mode? Or make a note of it somewhere in the top area.

Run the following `kubectl apply` command to create an HTTPRoute for `coffee` and `tea` applications. The `coffee` route uses an `ExternalAuth` filter to require authentication, while the `tea` route is exposed without one:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /coffee
    filters:
    - type: ExternalAuth
      externalAuth:
        protocol: HTTP
        backendRef:
          name: ext-auth-server
          port: 80
        http:
          path: /
          allowedHeaders:
          - X-Api-Key
        forwardBody:
          maxSize: 1024
    backendRefs:
    - name: coffee
      port: 80
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: tea
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: Exact
        value: /tea
    backendRefs:
    - name: tea
      port: 80
EOF
```

> The filter fields `backendRef` and `http.path` set the upstream and URI of the authentication subrequest, `http.allowedHeaders` and `http.allowedResponseHeaders` control which client headers flow to the authentication service and which response headers flow back onto the proxied request, and `forwardBody.maxSize` sets the maximum body size accepted for forwarding. The value is applied as `client_max_body_size` on the main request, so requests with a body larger than `maxSize` are rejected with `413 Request Entity Too Large` rather than forwarded partially.

Reviewer: can we add `http.allowedResponseHeaders` to the example above? Not sure if this was an oversight or if its incompatible with the filter, but explaining it w/o it being on the example feels a bit confusing.

Author: let me remove that line.

---
title: Configure external authentication
weight: 600
toc: true
nd-content-type: how-to
nd-product: FABRIC
nd-description: How to configure external authentication in NGINX Gateway Fabric using the `ExternalAuth` filter on HTTPRoute.
nd-summary: >

>   NGINX Gateway Fabric supports external authentication via the `ExternalAuth` filter on HTTPRoute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  NGINX Gateway Fabric supports external authentication via the `ExternalAuth` filter on an HTTPRoute.
```

  Before proxying a request to the backend, NGINX performs an authorization subrequest to an external service.
  A 2xx response allows the request through, and any other status rejects it.
  This feature uses the NGINX [ngx_http_auth_request_module](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html).
---

> This guide describes how to configure external authentication in NGINX Gateway Fabric using the `ExternalAuth` filter on HTTPRoute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to configure external authentication in NGINX Gateway Fabric using the `ExternalAuth` filter on an HTTPRoute.
```

kind: Service
metadata:
  name: tea
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8080
    protocol: TCP
    name: http
  selector:
    app: tea
EOF
```

To confirm the application pods are running, run `kubectl get`:

```shell
kubectl get pods
```

```text
NAME                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
coffee-654ddf664b-fllj7   1/1     Running   0          21s
tea-75bc9f4b6d-cx2jl      1/1     Running   0          21s
```

## Create a Gateway

Run the following `kubectl apply` command to create a Gateway:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: nginx
  listeners:
  - name: http
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    hostname: "*.example.com"
EOF
```

Confirm the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status with `kubectl describe`:

```shell
kubectl describe gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io gateway
```

```text
Addresses:
  Type:   IPAddress
  Value:  10.96.20.187
```

Save the public IP address and port of the Gateway into shell variables:

```shell
GW_IP=XXX.YYY.ZZZ.III
GW_PORT=<port number>
```

## Deploy the external authentication server

> The authentication service is an NGINX deployment that checks the `X-Api-Key` request header. If the header value is `my-custom-secret`, the server responds with `200 OK`; otherwise it responds with `401 Unauthorized`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This sample authentication service is an NGINX deployment that checks the `X-Api-Key` request header. If the header value is `my-custom-secret`, the server responds with `200 OK`; otherwise it responds with `401 Unauthorized`.
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<'EOF'
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: ext-auth-config
data:
  default.conf: |
    server {
        listen 8080;

        location / {
            if ($http_x_api_key != "my-custom-secret") {
                return 401 "unauthorized";
            }
            return 200 "ok";
        }
    }
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: ext-auth-server
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: ext-auth-server
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: ext-auth-server
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx

>         image: nginx:1.27

Reviewer 2: Let's just use the latest tag here so it doesn't go stale over time.

## Troubleshooting

- If the HTTPRoute is not accepted, run `kubectl describe httproute coffee` and check the `Status` conditions for validation errors.
- If every request returns `401`, confirm that the authentication server is reachable from the NGINX pod and that the `backendRef` name, namespace, and port are correct.
- If a required request header is not reaching the authentication server, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedHeaders`.
- If a response header from the authentication server is not reaching the backend, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedResponseHeaders`.
- If a request is rejected with `413 Request Entity Too Large`, raise `forwardBody.maxSize` to accommodate the client body.
- If the HTTPRoute reports `ResolvedRefs: False` with an `InvalidFilter` reason mentioning `body.maxSize`, remove either the `ExternalAuth` filter's `forwardBody.maxSize` or the ClientSettingsPolicy's `body.maxSize` as they both cannot be set on the same route.

## Further reading

> - [HTTPRoute filters API reference]({{< ref "/ngf/reference/api.md" >}})

Reviewer 2: This API reference doesn't contain anything about HTTPRoute filters. This is for NGF APIs only.

- [NGINX HTTP auth request module](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html)

> - [Example deployment files for ExternalAuth](https://github.com/nginx/nginx-gateway-fabric/tree/main/examples/external-authentication)

Reviewer 2: Do we usually link to the example files? They're already included in the doc here, maybe there's benefit though...

Author: I think I did it for OIDC but i don't see other docs doing it. i guess it can be removed

---
title: Configure external authentication
weight: 600
toc: true
nd-content-type: how-to
nd-product: FABRIC
nd-description: How to configure external authentication in NGINX Gateway Fabric using the `ExternalAuth` filter on HTTPRoute.
nd-summary: >
  NGINX Gateway Fabric supports external authentication via the `ExternalAuth` filter on an HTTPRoute.
  Before proxying a request to the backend, NGINX performs an authorization subrequest to an external service.
  A 2xx response allows the request through, and any other status rejects it.
  This feature uses the NGINX [ngx_http_auth_request_module](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html).
---

This guide describes how to configure external authentication in NGINX Gateway Fabric using the `ExternalAuth` filter on an HTTPRoute.

External authentication delegates the authorization decision for each request to an external service. NGINX issues a subrequest to that service before proxying the original request, and forwards the request only if the service responds with a 2xx status.

> By following these instructions, you will create two sample applications. The `coffee` endpoint is protected by an `ExternalAuth` filter, and the `tea` endpoint is exposed without any external authentication filter, so you can compare the behavior of each.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Following these instructions to create two sample applications and compare the behavior of each:
- `coffee` endpoint: Protected by an `ExternalAuth` filter.
- `tea` endpoint: Exposed without any external authentication filter.

```

## Overview

The `ExternalAuth` filter is declared in the `filters` list of an HTTPRoute rule. When NGINX processes a request that matches the rule, it first sends a subrequest to the backend referenced by the filter. Based on the status returned by that backend, NGINX either forwards the original request to the route's `backendRefs` or returns the error status to the client.

Each route rule supports only one `ExternalAuth` filter. If your authentication flow requires multiple checks, consolidate them into a single authentication service that performs all the necessary validations.

The filter translates to NGINX's [ngx_http_auth_request_module](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html) directives:

> - [`auth_request`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request) — sends a subrequest to the specified URI and grants or denies access based on the response status.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`auth_request`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request) — Sends a subrequest to the specified URI and grants or denies access based on the response status.
```

> - [`auth_request_set`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request_set) — captures a value from the authentication response and stores it in a variable for use in the main request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`auth_request_set`](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_auth_request_module.html#auth_request_set) — Captures a value from the authentication response and stores it in a variable for use in the main request.
```

Run the following `kubectl apply` command to create an HTTPRoute for `coffee` and `tea` applications. The `coffee` route uses an `ExternalAuth` filter to require authentication, while the `tea` route is exposed without one:

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: coffee
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /coffee
    filters:
    - type: ExternalAuth
      externalAuth:
        protocol: HTTP
        backendRef:
          name: ext-auth-server
          port: 80
        http:
          path: /
          allowedHeaders:
          - X-Api-Key
        forwardBody:
          maxSize: 1024
    backendRefs:
    - name: coffee
      port: 80
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: tea
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "cafe.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: Exact
        value: /tea
    backendRefs:
    - name: tea
      port: 80
EOF
```

> `backendRef` and `http.path` identify the authentication service and the URI that receives the subrequest. `http.allowedHeaders` lists the client headers that are forwarded to the authentication service. `forwardBody.maxSize` sets the largest request body the gateway will accept and forward; anything larger is rejected with `413 Request Entity Too Large`.

Reviewer: I still liked the previous wording where it started with "The filter fields...", but i guess thats also a docs style question for a docs member

edit: sorry for pinging docs team

Author: @kkyle-f5 did you have any input on this?

Reviewer 3: No specific feedback on that particular aspect. I did suggest removing future tenset (will). You should be OK to start with "The filter fields..." if that's an important detail to include.

> `backendRef` and `http.path` identify the authentication service and the URI that receives the subrequest. `http.allowedHeaders` lists the client headers that are forwarded to the authentication service. `forwardBody.maxSize` sets the largest request body the gateway will accept and forward; anything larger is rejected with `413 Request Entity Too Large`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`backendRef` and `http.path` identify the authentication service and the URI that receives the subrequest. `http.allowedHeaders` lists the client headers that are forwarded to the authentication service. `forwardBody.maxSize` sets the largest request body the gateway accepts and forwards; anything larger is rejected with `413 Request Entity Too Large`.
```

{{< call-out "note" >}}

> By default, no headers from the authentication server response are copied onto the proxied request. To forward headers such as a user ID or role from the authentication server to the backend, list them explicitly in `allowedResponseHeaders`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, no headers from the authentication server response are copied onto the proxied request. To forward headers, such as a user ID or role, from the authentication server to the backend, list them explicitly in `allowedResponseHeaders`.
```

{{< /call-out >}}

Verify both HTTPRoutes are accepted with `kubectl describe`:

```shell
kubectl describe httproute coffee | grep "Status:" -A10
```

```text
Status:
  Parents:
    Conditions:
      Last Transition Time:  2026-04-16T15:18:55Z
      Message:               The Route is accepted
      Observed Generation:   1
      Reason:                Accepted
      Status:                True
      Type:                  Accepted
      Last Transition Time:  2026-04-16T15:18:55Z
      Message:               All references are resolved
      Observed Generation:   1
      Reason:                ResolvedRefs
      Status:                True
      Type:                  ResolvedRefs
    Controller Name:         gateway.nginx.org/nginx-gateway-controller
```

## Verify external authentication

{{< call-out "note" >}}

Your clients should be able to resolve "cafe.example.com" to the public IP of the NGINX Service.

> This guide simulates that using curl's `--resolve` option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide simulates that using the `--resolve` option in curl.
```

{{< /call-out >}}

Access `/coffee` without an API key:

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee
```

```text
<html>
<head><title>401 Authorization Required</title></head>
<body>
<center><h1>401 Authorization Required</h1></center>
<hr><center>nginx</center>
</body>
</html>
```

Access `/coffee` with a valid API key:

```shell
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee -H "X-Api-Key: my-custom-secret"
```

```text
Server address: 10.244.0.151:8080
Server name: coffee-654ddf664b-l9ml5
Date: 16/Apr/2026:20:14:28 +0000
URI: /coffee
Request ID: 217931bc5fe27254d1821cec91e1f2d8
```

> The `X-Api-Key` header is listed in `allowedHeaders`, so it reaches the authentication server, which responds `200 OK`. NGINX then proxies the request to the `coffee` backend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `X-Api-Key` header is listed in `allowedHeaders` so that it reaches the authentication server, which responds `200 OK`. NGINX then proxies the request to the `coffee` backend.
```

```shell
BODY=$(head -c 1100 /dev/zero | tr '\0' 'x')
curl --resolve cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT:$GW_IP http://cafe.example.com:$GW_PORT/coffee -X POST -H "X-Api-Key: my-custom-secret" -d "$BODY"
```

```text
<html>
<head><title>413 Request Entity Too Large</title></head>
<body>
<center><h1>413 Request Entity Too Large</h1></center>
<hr><center>nginx</center>
</body>
</html>
```

`client_max_body_size` can also be set on a route through a [ClientSettingsPolicy]({{< ref "/ngf/traffic-management/client-settings.md" >}}) via its `body.maxSize` field. If a ClientSettingsPolicy with `body.maxSize` is attached to the same HTTPRoute as an `ExternalAuth` filter that sets `forwardBody.maxSize`, the HTTPRoute is marked invalid with reason `InvalidFilter`.

## Troubleshooting

- If the HTTPRoute is not accepted, run `kubectl describe httproute coffee` and check the `Status` conditions for validation errors.
- If every request returns `401`, confirm that the authentication server is reachable from the NGINX pod and that the `backendRef` name, namespace, and port are correct.

> - If a required request header is not reaching the authentication server, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedHeaders`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If a required request header cannot reach the authentication server, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedHeaders`.
```

> - If a response header from the authentication server is not reaching the backend, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedResponseHeaders`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If a response header from the authentication server cannot reach the backend, confirm it is listed in `http.allowedResponseHeaders`.
```
